# Graphql

Graphql is an api design offering a flexible and efficient usage of the
endpoints and service developed in your applications. While endpoints in
[REST api](./rest.md) are fixed, graphql is not. It is a query language that
allows clients to request exactly the data they need at any time. This query
language is based on a defined typed schema (contract) generated by the server
and used by the clients to make proper requests.

Graphql only exposes a single endpoint `POST /graphql`. With this endpoint,
clients can create their own query to get the information from multiple servers.
Some benefits from using graphql are:

- Every time a request is sent, clients send which data to obtain. Multiple
  queries can be combined to get one response.
- Clients can optimize response payload, avoiding over-fetching and
  under-fetching.
- No need to configure multiple services neither versions.
- Real-time notification.

Graphql response is always a json object with the same structure as the query.
Successful responses are under the `data` field, while errors are under the
`errors` field. If more than one query is sent, the response will contain both
successful and failed responses (query name will be key in the `data` json
object), allowing partial success.

## Concepts

- **Query**: request to get data. Allows full control on what resources to
  retrieved.
- **Mutation**: request to perform modification on resources.
- **Subscriptions**: enables clients to listen for changes and receive automatic
  updates when resources are modified.

## Disadvantages

- **Complexity**: not plug-and-play like REST, requires more configuration and
  schema.
- **Caching**: is a challenge, as each request is configured by client.
- **Optimization**: huge nested payload request can overload the system. As we
  don’t know which data to retrieve beforehand, endpoints needs to be optimized,
  avoiding any impact in your database.

## References

- [GraphQL Official Site](https://graphql.org/)
- [GraphQL vs REST](https://blog.algomaster.io/p/rest-vs-graphql)
