# Observability

Server observability refers to the practice of monitoring and gaining insights
into the performance, health, and behavior of servers and the applications or
services running on them. It is a critical aspect of managing and maintaining
server infrastructure, especially in modern, complex, and distributed computing
environments. Server observability helps organizations detect and diagnose
issues, optimize performance, and ensure the reliability of their IT systems.

Server observability is an essential practice in modern IT operations,
especially for cloud-based and containerized environments, where servers and
services are highly dynamic and interconnected.

## Logging

Collecting and analyzing logs generated by server applications and services.
Logs can provide detailed information about events, errors, and transactions,
helping in troubleshooting and debugging issues. There are different log system
out there, so better approach is to use a tool to standardize the output of the
logs, such as [Fluentd](https://www.fluentd.org/), an Open source data
collector. Logs are collected in a central location, where they can be
displayed. A good tool for this is [Kibana](https://www.elastic.co/kibana), with
[ElasticSearch](https://www.elastic.co/es/elasticsearch) for data storage.

## Metrics

Gathering and analyzing various metrics such as CPU utilization, memory usage,
disk I/O, network traffic, and application-specific performance indicators.
These metrics provide a real-time view of the server's health and performance.
[Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) is an open-source systems monitoring and
alerting toolkit. It comes with a query language built-in, where powerful
queries can be written to gain insight into the system's behavior. Alerts
regarding this metrics can be send to another system like
[Sentry](https://sentry.io/welcome/) or [Nagios](https://www.nagios.org/).

For metrics visualization, [Grafana](https://grafana.com/) is a good option.

## Tracing

Tracing requests as they traverse through various components of a distributed
system. Distributed tracing helps in identifying latency bottlenecks and
understanding the flow of requests in a microservices architecture.

[Jaeger](https://www.jaegertracing.io/) is an open source end-to-end distributed
system to help tracing request within the system.

To implement server observability effectively, organizations often use specialized tools and platforms, such as monitoring and observability solutions like Prometheus, Grafana, Elasticsearch, Kibana, , and many others. These tools help in collecting, storing, analyzing, and visualizing the data needed to maintain and improve server performance and reliability.

## References

- [Observability](https://www.ibm.com/topics/observability)
